.TH XAI.PY 1 "January 2026" "Version 1.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
xai.py \- explainable multi-objective optimization using decision trees

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ./xai.py
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIACTION\fR] [\fIFILE\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xai.py
is a lightweight, zero-dependency Python framework for multi-objective optimization.
Unlike "black box" AI models, it focuses on interpretability by generating decision trees that isolate the "best" outcomes ("heaven") from the rest.
It uses a recursive partitioning algorithm ("backpacking" code style) to cluster data, maximizing the separation between high-scoring and low-scoring rows based on weighted Euclidean distance to specific goals.

.SH DATA FORMAT
The input must be a CSV file. The first row (header) defines column roles using casing and suffixes:
.TP
.B [A-Z]* (Starts with Uppercase)
Numeric columns (e.g., "Age", "Weight").
.TP
.B [a-z]* (Starts with Lowercase)
Symbolic/Categorical columns (e.g., "job", "color").
.TP
.B name+ (Ends with +)
A numeric goal to \fBmaximize\fR (e.g., "Salary+").
.TP
.B name- (Ends with -)
A numeric goal to \fBminimize\fR (e.g., "Cost-").
.TP
.B nameX (Ends with X)
A column to \fBignore\fR (e.g., "idX").
.TP
.B ?
Denotes a missing value in the data.

.SH OPTIONS
Configuration flags control the internal algorithms.
.TP
.BI \-b " bins"
Set the number of bins for discretizing continuous values.
Default is \fB7\fR.
.TP
.BI \-B " Budget"
Set the max number of rows to evaluate during optimization. Default is \fB30\fR.
.TP
.BI \-C " Check"
Set the number of guesses to check during stochastic search. Default is \fB5\fR.
.TP
.BI \-d " file"
Set the default data file to load. Default is \fBdata.csv\fR.
.TP
.BI \-h
Print the help message and exit.
.TP
.BI \-l " leaf"
Set the minimum size for leaf nodes.
The tree stops growing if a node has fewer than \fI2 * leaf\fR rows. Default is \fB2\fR.
.TP
.BI \-s " seed"
Set the random number generator seed. Default is \fB1\fR.

.SH ACTIONS
Action flags trigger specific analysis routines.
.TP
.B \-\-all
Run all test suites and examples.
.TP
.B \-\-bins
Show the rankings of bins found in the data.
.TP
.B \-\-clone
Test internal table replication logic.
.TP
.B \-\-csv
Test the CSV loader; prints raw parsed rows.
.TP
.B \-\-data
Test column generation;
prints column statistics.
.TP
.B \-\-distx
Sort/print rows by distance to a specific row (independent vars).
.TP
.B \-\-disty
Sort/print rows by distance to "heaven" (dependent goals).
.TP
.B \-\-num
Run unit tests for the \fBNum\fR class.
.TP
.B \-\-sym
Run unit tests for the \fBSym\fR class.
.TP
.B \-\-tree
Run the decision tree optimizer once and display the rule hierarchy.
.TP
.B \-\-xais
Run the optimizer 20 times and display stability statistics.

.SH EXAMPLES
.B Generate a decision tree for a custom dataset:
.RS
  ./xai.py \-\-tree data/auto93.csv
.RE
.PP
.B Run stability analysis with a specific seed:
.RS
  ./xai.py \-s 12345 \-\-xais
.RE
.PP
.B Debug data parsing:
.RS
  ./xai.py \-\-csv data.csv
.RE

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Tim Menzies (2025).

.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
